A couple of teams 



Microplastics






Whales
A team from Australia used expired military sonobuoys, or listening devices that can be deployed and sit underwater to listen for whales and other sounds under the ocean. 

Every few hours, they threw a sonobuoy over the side which triggered a float to inflate. They had already chopped off the parachute which was attached (because these things are normally thrown out of aircraft as listening devices) so that didn’t get in the way. Then they ran upstairs (4 floors) to where they had their computer which was hooked up to the radio antenna receiving the signals. Using special software they were able to distinguish between species and also individual whales. By monitoring the direction and distance from which the calls came, they were able to distinguish a rough area of where the whales were. There were a lot more out there than they were able to see though! 

Albatross and sea bird distrubution

In addition to the team listening to the hidden world under the water, there was a team spending daylight hours out on deck or in bad weather, on the bridge, watching for mammals and birds. 

They  had some fantastic sightings of whales, but we didn’t miss out on them all!
[photo of killer whales, humpbacks]

At the islands that we visited and along the Antarctic coast they did aerial surveys of bird colonies which showed some interesting and larger sights for some penguins that previously thought, and others that had declined. As these areas are so difficult to reach and do proper studies at, or in many cases are only visited very rarely, it was very important to be able to get estimates of the circumpolar population. 
[photo of penguin colony from the air]

Albatrosses for example, a large pelagic, or seagoing bird, breed only in the Southern Hemisphere. Despite that,they are occasionally seen in the Northern Hemisphere and are known to fly huge distances when they aren’t breeding. 15 of the 22 species of albatross are threatened, primarily by fishing activities.  Other threats include invasive species and climate change among others. Rats have recently been eradicated from South Georgia and will hopefully soon be eradicated from one of the other islands that we visited. 
[photo of albatross, near boat or flying]

We were lucky enough to share a flight with them in the helicopter at the last island we stopped at in the South Atlantic. Bouvetoya, a Norwegian island, is considered the most remote island in the world, being around 2000 km from any other land!
[aerial photo of Bouvetoya]



Peter I island






Scott Island






Bouvetoya







Mertz glacier
